Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular
disease that directly impacts respiratory function,
making it critical for respiratory
therapists to recognize early.
At its core, this condition is caused by
an autoimmune
attack on acetylcholine receptors at the
neuromuscular junction.
This blocks normal communication between
nerves and muscles, leading to
muscle weakness that worsens with activity
and improves with rest.
From an RT perspective, the biggest
concern is respiratory muscle
involvement.
Patients may initially present with subtle
signs like ptosis, diplopia,
or difficulty chewing and swallowing, but
as the disease progresses,
weakness can affect the diaphragm and
intercostal muscles, leading to
hypoventilation and respiratory failure.
Pathophysiologically, fewer functional
receptors mean reduced muscle contraction strength.
Over time, repeated use leads to fatigue
because the available
receptors cannot sustain muscle
activation.
This is why symptoms worsen throughout the
day or with repeated effort.
Diagnostics often include antibody
testing, edrophonium testing,
and pulmonary function monitoring.
Key respiratory metrics include vital
capacity and negative inspiratory force.
A declining vital capacity, especially
below 15 mL per kg
or a weak NIF, is a major red flag for
impending respiratory failure.
One of the most important distinctions is
between a myasthenic crisis and a cholinergic
crisis.
A myasthenic crisis is due to too little
acetylcholine activity and requires increased support,
often including ventilatory assistance.
A cholinergic crisis, on the other hand,
is caused by too much acetylcholine,
typically from over-medication,
and presents with increased secretions and
bradycardia.
Management focuses on maintaining airway,
breathing,
and ventilation.
Non-invasive support may be appropriate
early, but intubation should
not be delayed if the patient shows signs
of fatigue or deteriorating gas exchange.
Medications include anticholinesterase
agents, corticosteroids, and
immunosuppressants.
For respiratory therapists, continuous
monitoring is essential.
Watch for decreasing tidal volume, rising
CO2,
increasing work of breathing, and changes
in mental status.
These are signs the patient is failing.
The key takeaway is this.
Myasthenia gravis is not just a muscle
disease.
It's a ventilation problem waiting to
happen.
Early recognition, careful monitoring, and
timely
intervention can prevent rapid
deterioration and save lives.